---
permalink: /research/
title: "Research"
---

Jump to:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;[Current Reserach Projects](#current-reserach-projects)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;[Previous Reserach Projects](#previous-research)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;[Supervision](#supervision)

My key research interests are around interdisciplinary problems in conservation science. Most of my previous research has foucessed on developing quantitative and qualitative approaches for understanding the impacts of environmental policies and programs on biodiversity values in the landscape. I have undertaken extensive research on biodiversity offsetting, impact evaluation for conservation, conservation planning, spatial prioritization and private land conservation.


## Current Reserach Projects

### Identifying counterfactuals for quantifying the value of avoided loss 

This project is working with NSW [Biodiversity Conservation Trust (BCT)][BCT-link]. We are undertaking predictive spatial modelling and machine learning to predict where future clearing of woody vegetation will be likely occur. The motivation for this work is to be able to better estimate the losses that conservation interventions are avoiding (ie that gains they are delivering due to "avoided or averted losses"). We use the spatial modelling to determine how likely woody vegetation at a given site would have been cleared if hadn't been protected (the "counterfactual"). The final goal is to be able to estimate the avoided loss generated by all of the BCT's agreements that are protecting native woody vegetation on private land. The analysis will combine the predictive spatial modelling with statistical matching to determine both the avoided loss current agreements have generated to date, as well as estimates of the likely future avoided loss they will generate in the coming decade. 

### Systematic sensitivity analysis of components of the metrics in the Biodiversity Assessment Method

This project is working with the New South Wales [Department of Planning Industry and Environment][DPIE-link]. It focuses on the the Biodiversity Assessment Method (BAM) which describes the methods and metrics used by the NSW Government for assessing current and future biodiversity values at development (impact) and potential biodiversity offset sites. The estimation of these values relies on calculation of current and future Vegetation Integrity, a surrogate for biodiversity based on plot-based assessment of the structure, composition and function of the vegetation.

The aim of the project is to provide an improved understanding of whether calculation of current and future Vegetation Integrity is operating as intended, that is it meets policy objectives (No Net Loss of biodiversity, robust and transparent), provides consistent and robust estimates, and reflects current ecological predictions. Part of the project will involve undertaking detailed sensitivity analysis of all inputs to and structure of the calculations that go into determining current and guture Vegetation Integrity.


##<a name="previous-research">Previous Reserach Projects</a>
To come...

##<a name="supervision">Supervision</a>

### Current PhD studetns 
To come...

### Past PhD studetns 
To come...

[BCT-link]:https://www.bct.nsw.gov.au/
[SLATS-NSW]:https://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/topics/animals-and-plants/native-vegetation/landcover-monitoring-and-reporting/woody-vegetation-change-statewide-landcover-tree-study/more-about-slats
[DPIE-link]:https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/